AllegroGraph Python API
=======================

|pypi-python-version| |pypi-status| |conda-status|

The AllegroGraph Python API offers convenient and efficient access to
an AllegroGraph server from a Python-based application. This API
provides methods for creating, querying and maintaining RDF data, and
for managing the stored triples. The AllegroGraph Python API
deliberately emulates the Eclipse RDF4J (formerly Aduna Sesame) API to
make it easier to migrate from RDF4J to AllegroGraph. The AllegroGraph
Python API has also been extended in ways that make it easier and more
intuitive than the RDF4J API.

.. When including this in Sphinx omit the header section: SPHINX-START-HERE

Requirements
------------
Python versions ``>=3.8,<3.12`` are supported. The installation method
described here uses the pip package manager. On some systems this
might require installing an additional package (e.g. ``python-pip`` on
RHEL/CentOS systems). All third-party libraries used by the Python
client will be downloaded automatically during installation.

Installation
------------
.. important:: It is highly recommended to perform the install in a
               `virtualenv`_ environment.

The client can be installed from PyPI_ using the ``pip`` package
manager::

   pip install agraph-python
               
Alternatively, a distribution archive can be obtained from
ftp://ftp.franz.com/pub/agraph/python-client/ and installed using `pip`::

    pip install agraph-python-<VERSION>.tar.gz

Offline installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If it is not possible to access PyPI_ from the target machine, the
following steps should be taken:

   * In a compatible environment with unrestricted network
     access run::

        pip wheel agraph-python

   * This will generate a number of ``.whl`` files in the current
     directory. These files must be transferred to the target machine.

   * On the target machine use this command to install::

        pip install --no-index --find-links=<DIR> agraph-python

     where ``<DIR>`` is the directory containing the ``.whl`` files
     generated in the previous step.

Install by `conda`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Using `conda` to install `agraph-python` is also supported::

  conda create -n myenv python=3.10
  conda activate myenv
  conda install -y -c conda-forge -c franzinc agraph-python

Testing
-------
To validate the installation make sure that you have access to an
AllegroGraph server and run the following Python script::

    from franz.openrdf.connect import ag_connect
    with ag_connect('repo', host='HOST', port='PORT',
                    user='USER', password='PASS') as conn:
        print (conn.size())

Substitute appropriate values for the HOST/PORT/USER/PASS
placeholders. If the script runs successfully a new repository named
`repo` will be created.

Proxy setup
----------- 
It is possible to configure the AllegroGraph Python client to use a
proxy for all its connection to the server. This can be achieved by
setting the ``AGRAPH_PROXY`` environment variable, as in the following
example::

    # Create a SOCKS proxy for tunneling to an internal network
    ssh -fN -D 1080 user@gateway.example.com
    # Configure agraph-python to use this proxy
    export AGRAPH_PROXY=socks://localhost:1080

The format of the ``AGRAPH_PROXY`` value is ``TYPE://HOST:PORT``,
where ``TYPE`` can be either ``http``, ``socks4``, ``socks5`` or
``socks`` (a synonym for ``socks5``). Note that if a SOCKS proxy is
used, DNS lookups will be performed by the proxy server.

Unit tests
~~~~~~~~~~
The Python client includes a suite of unit tests that can be run after
installation.  The tests are executed using the ``pytest`` framework
and also use a few utilities from ``nose``, so these two packages have
to be installed. We also need the ``pytest-mock`` plugin::

    pip install -e ".[test]"

The tests require a running AllegroGraph server instance. The
configuration of this server is passed to the tests through
environment variables::

    # Host and port where the server can be reached. These values are the
    # default, it is only necessary to define the variables below if your
    # setup is different
    export AGRAPH_HOST=localhost
    export AGRAPH_PORT=10035

    # Tests will create repositories in this catalog.
    # It must exist on the server. Use "/" for the root catalog.
    export AGRAPH_CATALOG=tests

    # Login credentials for the AG server.
    # The user must have superuser privileges.
    export AGRAPH_USER=test

    # Use a prompt to read the password
    read -s -r -p "Password for user ${AGRAPH_USER}: " AGRAPH_PASSWORD
    export AGRAPH_PASSWORD


To run the tests, type::

    pytest --pyargs franz.openrdf.tests.tests --pyargs franz.openrdf.tests.newtests

.. _PyPI: https://pypi.python.org/
.. _virtualenv: https://virtualenv.pypa.io/

.. |conda-status| image:: https://img.shields.io/conda/v/franzinc/agraph-python.svg?logo=anaconda&logoColor=gold
   :alt: Anaconda package
   :scale: 100%
   :target: https://anaconda.org/franzinc/agraph-python

.. |pypi-status| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/agraph-python.svg?logo=python&logoColor=gold
   :alt: PyPI package
   :scale: 100%
   :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/agraph-python
            
.. |pypi-python-version| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/agraph-python?logo=python&logoColor=gold
   :alt: PyPI - Python Version
   :scale: 100%
